In simple words, principal component analysis is a method of extracting important variables (in form of components) from a large set of variables available in a data set. It extracts low dimensional set of features from a high dimensional data set with a motive to capture as much information as possible.
With fewer variables, visualization also becomes much more meaningful.
PCA is more useful when dealing with 3 or higher dimensional data.
the matrix should be numeric and have standardized data
Let’s say we have a data set of dimension 300 (n) × 50 (p). n represents the number of observations and p represents number of predictors. Since we have a large p = 50, there can be p(p-1)/2 scatter plots i.e more than 1000 plots possible to analyze the variable relationship.
Wouldn’t is be a tedious job to perform exploratory analysis on this data ?

In this case, it would be a lucid approach to select a subset of p (p << 50) predictor which captures as much information.
Followed by plotting the observation in the resultant low dimensional space.

A principal component is a normalized linear combination of the original predictors in a data set.
PCA is used to overcome features redundancy in a data set.
These features are low dimensional in nature.
These features a.k.a components are a resultant of normalized linear combination of original predictor variables.
These components aim to capture as much information as possible with high explained variance.
The first component has the highest variance followed by second, third and so on.
The components must be uncorrelated (remember orthogonal direction ? ). See above.
Normalizing data becomes extremely important when the predictors are measured in different units.
PCA works best on data set having 3 or higher dimensions. Because, with higher dimensions, it becomes increasingly difficult to make interpretations from the resultant cloud of data.
PCA is applied on a data set with numeric variables.
PCA is a tool which helps to produce better visualizations of high dimensional data.